[Blog] Remote development init (#25)
juspay/flakular.in: blog/nixos_remote_development/2023-11-16-Pilot.mdx

---
description: A minimal NixOS configuration to get started with remote development.
slug: nixos-remote-development
authors: shivaraj-bh
tags: [nixos, minimal, flakes, nix]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

# NixOS Remote Development

In this series of blog posts, we'll explore how to set up a remote development environment using NixOS. The goal of this post is to:
- Create a minimal NixOS configuration.
- Deploy the configuration (partition the disk and install the OS) to a remote machine over SSH (without a bootable USB).

## Why?

For starters, your system configuration is defined in code. This means that you don't have to login to see the state, like what users are present on the system, what services are running, etc. You can also deploy the configuration remotely.

If you are someone who would like to use a powerful remote machine for development, while carrying around a lightweight laptop, then this post is for you.

## The `flake.nix` file

:::note
If you are looking to just get started, you can skip this section and jump to the [next one](#deploying-the-configuration).
:::

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps add a description of the flake as a paragraph here. Like `Here's a flake that contains a single NixOS configuration called "office"`

  };
  outputs = { nixpkgs, disko, ... }:
    {
      nixosConfigurations.office = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
        system = "x86_64-linux";
        modules = [
          disko.nixosModules.disko
          ({ ... }: {
            imports = [
              ./disk-config.nix
            ];
            services.openssh.enable = true;
            users.users = {
              root = {
                # Post-installation, the IP might change if MAC is not the
                # only identifier used by DHCP server to lease an IP, by setting a
                # password you can find the changed IP.
                initialHashedPassword = "";
                openssh.authorizedKeys.keys = [
                  "ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIFN5Ov2zDIG59/DaYKjT0sMWIY15er1DZCT9SIak07vK"
                ];
              };
            };
            boot.loader.grub = {
              # adding devices is managed by disko
              # devices = [ ];
              efiSupport = true;
              efiInstallAsRemovable = true;
            };
            system.stateVersion = "23.11";
          }
          )
        ];
      };
    };
}
```

### `nixosConfigurations` attribute

> It is a set of attributes, where each attribute is a NixOS configuration. This is how it looks like with two configurations:

Reviewer: A blog post should have a smooth flow for a new reader who may not have prior knowledge or assumptions, so:

```suggestion
Flakes can output a special attribute called `nixosConfigurations` which can contain multiple NixOS configurations. It is a set of attributes, where each attribute is a NixOS configuration. This is how it looks like with two configurations:
```

- `disko.devices.disk.<device-name>.content.partitions`:
    - [`boot`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BIOS_boot_partition)
    - [`ESP`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EFI_system_partition)
    - [`root`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_directory)

### `configuration.nix` as a module

Traditionally, `configuration.nix` is a file that contains the entire NixOS configuration. But, in this case, we are using it as a module. This is how it looks like, in the [`flake.nix`](#the-flakenix-file):
```nix
# Inside `outputs`
{
    nixosConfigurations.office = lib.nixosSystem{
        # ...
        modules = [
            # ...
            ({ ... }: {
                # Your `configuration.nix` goes here
            })
        ];
    }
}
```

In this module we do the following things:
- Enable SSH access to the machine.
- Set a password for the `root` user.
- Add an SSH key to the `root` user's `authorized_keys` file.
- Enable GRUB with EFI support.
<!-- Verify the point below -->
- Set the `system.stateVersion` to `23.11` to avoid rebuilding the system on every `nixos-rebuild switch`.
- Import the `disk-config.nix` file that we created [earlier](#disko-module).

> ## Deploying the configuration

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be called 'Installing NixOS' or 'Installing this configuration'?

But don't we already need a linux based OS to be running to run `kexec` in the first place? Yes, we do. If you don't have one, you can also use a [live/rescue image](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Live_USB) to do this.

[`nixos-anywhere`](https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-anywhere) is a tool that automates this process for us. To follow along:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/juspay/remote-development.git
cd remote-development
git checkout a23acb9cb0a51e048096b3e4c8130b979ca0c2fa
```

The [README](https://github.com/juspay/remote-development/blob/a23acb9cb0a51e048096b3e4c8130b979ca0c2fa/README.md) should help you get started with the installation. Once you are done, you should be able to SSH into the machine.

## What's next?

In the next blog post, we'll explore how to make incremental changes to the configuration and deploy them to the machine.

You can track the progress [here](https://github.com/juspay/remote-development/issues/2).

## Credits

> Thanks to [srid](https://srid.ca/) for all the help and feedback.

Reviewer: Because I love Twitter,

```suggestion
Thanks to [srid](https://x.com/sridca) for all the help and feedback.
```
